Docs and cleanup (#492)
aai-institute/pyDVL: docs/value/applications.md

---
title: Applications of valuation
---

# Applications of valuation

Data valuation methods hold promise for improving various aspects
of data engineering and machine learning workflows. When applied judiciously,
these methods can enhance data quality, model performance, and cost-effectiveness.

> While still an evolving field requiring careful use, data valuation has demonstrated
> utility across a range of data engineering tasks.
> 
> For a more comprehensive overview of applications, along with concrete examples,
> please refer to the [Transferlab blog post]({{ transferlab.website }}blog/data-valuation-applications/)
> on this topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While still an evolving field with methods requiring careful use, data valuation can
be applied across a wide range of data engineering tasks. For a comprehensive
overview, along with concrete examples, please refer to the [Transferlab blog
post]({{ transferlab.website }}blog/data-valuation-applications/) on this topic.
```

- Data value metrics can also help identify irrelevant or duplicated data
  when evaluating offerings from data providers.

## Model development

Data valuation techniques can provide insights for model debugging and interpretation.
Some of the useful applications include:

- Interpretation and debugging: Analyzing the most or least valuable samples
  for a class can reveal cases where the model relies on confounding features
  instead of true signal. Investigating influential points for misclassified examples
  highlights limitations to address.
- Sensitivity/robustness analysis: Prior work shows removing a small fraction
  of highly influential data can completely flip model conclusions.
  This reveals potential issues with the modeling approach, data collection process,
  or intrinsic difficulty of the problem that require further inspection.

  Robust models require many points removed before conclusions meaningfully shift.
  High sensitivity means conclusions heavily depend on small subsets of data,
  indicating deeper problems to resolve.
- Monitoring changes in data value during training provides insights into

>   model convergence and overfitting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  model convergence and overfitting.
- Continual learning: in order to avoid forgetting when training on new data,
  a subset of previously seen data is presented again. Data valuation helps
  in the selection of highly influential samples.
```

- Computing value scores for unlabeled data points supports efficient active learning.
  High-value points can be prioritized for labeling to maximize gains in model performance.
- Analyzing high- and low-value data provides insights to guide targeted data collection
  and improve upstream data processes. Low-value points may reveal data issues to address.
- Data value metrics can also help identify irrelevant or duplicated data
  when evaluating offerings from data providers.

## Model development

Data valuation techniques can provide insights for model debugging and interpretation.
Some of the useful applications include:

- Interpretation and debugging: Analyzing the most or least valuable samples
  for a class can reveal cases where the model relies on confounding features
  instead of true signal. Investigating influential points for misclassified examples
  highlights limitations to address.
- Sensitivity/robustness analysis: Prior work shows removing a small fraction
  of highly influential data can completely flip model conclusions.
  This reveals potential issues with the modeling approach, data collection process,

>   or intrinsic difficulty of the problem that require further inspection.
> 
>   Robust models require many points removed before conclusions meaningfully shift.

Reviewer: The empty line breaks rendering of the list
```suggestion
  or intrinsic difficulty of the problem that require further inspection.
  Robust models require many points removed before conclusions meaningfully shift.
```
